adds destination docs (#861)
dlt-hub/dlt: docs/website/docs/general-usage/destination.md

---
title: Destination
description: Declare and configure destinations to which to load data
keywords: [destination, load data, configure destination, name destination]
---

# Destination

[Destination](glossary.md#destination) is a location in which `dlt` creates and maintains the current version of the schema and loads your data. Destinations come in various forms: databases, datalakes, vector stores or files. `dlt` deals with this variety via modules which you declare when creating a pipeline.

> We maintain a set of [built in destinations](../dlt-ecosystem/destinations/) that you can use right away.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We maintain a set of [built-in destinations](../dlt-ecosystem/destinations/) that you can use right away.
```

* Import **destination class**
<!--@@@DLT_SNIPPET_START ./snippets/destination-snippets.py::class-->
```py
import dlt
from dlt.destinations import filesystem
pipeline = dlt.pipeline("pipeline", destination=filesystem)
```
<!--@@@DLT_SNIPPET_END ./snippets/destination-snippets.py::class-->
Above we import destination class for **filesystem** and pass it to the pipeline.

All examples above will create the same destination class with default parameters and pull required config and secret values from [configuration](credentials/configuration.md) - they are equivalent.

### Pass explicit parameters and a name to a destination
You can instantiate **destination class** yourself to configure it explicitly. When doing this you work with destinations the same way you work with [sources](source.md)
<!--@@@DLT_SNIPPET_START ./snippets/destination-snippets.py::instance-->
```py
import dlt
azure_bucket = filesystem("az://dlt-azure-bucket", destination_name="production_az_bucket")
pipeline = dlt.pipeline("pipeline", destination=azure_bucket)
```
<!--@@@DLT_SNIPPET_END ./snippets/destination-snippets.py::instance-->

> Above we import and instantiate the **filesystem** destination class. We pass explicit url of the bucket and name the destination to **production_az_bucket**.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Above we import and instantiate the `filesystem` destination class. We pass explicit url of the bucket and name the destination to `production_az_bucket`.
```

> If destination is not named, its shorthand type (the Python class name) serves as a destination name. Name your destination explicitly if you need several separate configurations of destinations of the same type ie. you wish to maintain credentials for development, staging and production storage buckets in the same config file. Destination name is also stored in the [load info](../running-in-production/running.md#inspect-and-save-the-load-info-and-trace) and pipeline traces so use them also when you need more descriptive names (than ie. **filesystem**).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If destination is not named, its shorthand type (the Python class name) serves as a destination name. Name your destination explicitly if you need several separate configurations of destinations of the same type (i.e. you wish to maintain credentials for development, staging and production storage buckets in the same config file). Destination name is also stored in the [load info](../running-in-production/running.md#inspect-and-save-the-load-info-and-trace) and pipeline traces so use them also when you need more descriptive names (other than, for example, `filesystem`).
```

## Configure a destination

> We recommend to pass the credentials and other required parameters to configuration via toml files, environment variables or other [config providers](credentials/config_providers.md). This allows you to ie. easily switch to production destinations after deployment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We recommend to pass the credentials and other required parameters to configuration via TOML files, environment variables or other [config providers](credentials/config_providers.md). This allows you, for example, to  easily switch to production destinations after deployment.
```

> We recommend to use the [**default config section layout**](credentials/configuration.md#default-layout-and-default-key-lookup-during-injection) as below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We recommend to use the [default config section layout](credentials/configuration.md#default-layout-and-default-key-lookup-during-injection) as below:
```

<!--@@@DLT_SNIPPET_START ./snippets/destination-toml.toml::default_layout-->
```toml
[destination.filesystem]
bucket_url="az://dlt-azure-bucket"
[destination.filesystem.credentials]
azure_storage_account_name="dltdata"
azure_storage_account_key="storage key"
```
<!--@@@DLT_SNIPPET_END ./snippets/destination-toml.toml::default_layout-->
or via environment variables:
```
DESTINATION__FILESYSTEM__BUCKET_URL=az://dlt-azure-bucket
DESTINATION__FILESYSTEM__CREDENTIALS__AZURE_STORAGE_ACCOUNT_NAME=dltdata
DESTINATION__FILESYSTEM__CREDENTIALS__AZURE_STORAGE_ACCOUNT_KEY="storage key"
```

> For named destinations you use its name in the config section

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For named destinations you use their names in the config section
```

<!--@@@DLT_SNIPPET_START ./snippets/destination-toml.toml::name_layout-->
```toml
[destination.production_az_bucket]
bucket_url="az://dlt-azure-bucket"
[destination.production_az_bucket.credentials]
azure_storage_account_name="dltdata"
azure_storage_account_key="storage key"
```
<!--@@@DLT_SNIPPET_END ./snippets/destination-toml.toml::name_layout-->

> Note that if you use [`dlt init` command](../walkthroughs/add-a-verified-source.md) to create or add a data source, `dlt` will create a sample configuration for selected destination.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that when you use [`dlt init` command](../walkthroughs/add-a-verified-source.md) to create or add a data source, `dlt` creates a sample configuration for selected destination.
```

### Pass explicit credentials

> You can pass **credentials** explicitly when creating destination class instance. This replaces the `credentials` argument in `dlt.pipeline` and `pipeline.load` methods - which is now deprecated. You can pass the required credentials object, its dictionary representation or the supported native form like below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can pass credentials explicitly when creating destination class instance. This replaces the `credentials` argument in `dlt.pipeline` and `pipeline.load` methods - which is now deprecated. You can pass the required credentials object, its dictionary representation or the supported native form like below:
```

```py
import dlt
from dlt.destinations import postgres

# pass credentials without password
# dlt will retrieve the password from ie. DESTINATION__POSTGRES__CREDENTIALS__PASSWORD
prod_postgres = postgres(credentials="postgresql://loader@localhost:5432/dlt_data")
pipeline = dlt.pipeline("pipeline", destination=prod_postgres)
```
<!--@@@DLT_SNIPPET_END ./snippets/destination-snippets.py::config_partial-->

<!--@@@DLT_SNIPPET_START ./snippets/destination-snippets.py::config_partial_spec-->
```py
import dlt
from dlt.destinations import filesystem
from dlt.sources.credentials import AzureCredentials

credentials = AzureCredentials()
# fill only the account name, leave key to be taken from secrets
credentials.azure_storage_account_name = "production_storage"
pipeline = dlt.pipeline("pipeline", destination=filesystem("az://dlt-azure-bucket", credentials=credentials))
```
<!--@@@DLT_SNIPPET_END ./snippets/destination-snippets.py::config_partial_spec-->

Please read how to use [various built in credentials types](credentials/config_specs.md).
:::

## Access a destination
When loading data, `dlt` will access the destination in two cases:

> 1. at the beginning of the `run` method to sync the pipeline state with the destination (or if you call `pipeline.sync_destination` explicitly)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. At the beginning of the `run` method to sync the pipeline state with the destination (or if you call `pipeline.sync_destination` explicitly).
```

> 2. in the `pipeline.load` method - to migrate schema and load the load package.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. In the `pipeline.load` method - to migrate schema and load the load package.
```

Obviously, dlt will access the destination when you instantiate [sql_client](../dlt-ecosystem/transformations/sql.md).

:::note

> `dlt` will not import the destination dependencies or access destination configuration if access is not needed. You can build multi-stage pipelines where steps are executed in separate processes/containers - the `extract` and `normalize` step do not need destination dependencies, configuration and actual connection.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`dlt` will not import the destination dependencies or access destination configuration if access is not needed. You can build multi-stage pipelines where steps are executed in separate processes or containers - the `extract` and `normalize` step do not need destination dependencies, configuration and actual connection.
```
